Warm greetings, warm greetings. Thank you all. Thanks so much. So, as we've been instructed,
and as we try to practice all the time in our formal sessions, and also in post-meditation,
we've got to reconnect these three points always. Renunciation, Bodhichitta, and pure
perception are the foundational points of Tibetan Buddhism, Vashriyana. So renunciation can bring
up this surge of joy, and just kindness, and that refreshing gratitude can highlight certain
things that we're grateful for, and really recognize how good we have it. So we do that
joy and appreciation. And then secondly, Bodhichitta, the heart mind of enlightenment, we all want
to be happy, and no one wants to suffer. It's just a universal human condition, quality.
So we kind of recognize that and extend our motivation. I'm doing this so that all beings
can be relieved of suffering and the causes of suffering, so they can be happy and have
the causes of happiness right now, and end up recognizing their own nature completely.
They'll be free forever. And then thirdly, pure perception. In our case, we're connecting
to the lineage blessings that we didn't really discover these teachings for ourselves. I
didn't discover the four noble truths, and the five powers, and the ten boomies, and
all these things that have been handed to us. Then what a fortune we have. We connect
with that. Wow, these amazing things we have at our disposal, and that reality works like
this. And we have the power and the personal opportunity to kind of lean into our own goodness
qualities and those of others, and have that be in the front to begin by seeing the goodness.
So this is like a very sutra way of talking about pure perception, to begin with Buddha
nature and then continue. So kind of activate this opening door into pure perception too.
So renunciation, bodhicitta, and pure perception. Kind of shine that on now.
Thank you. It's good to remember these three points. That's what we're always kind of,
that's where we're trying to begin, where we're kind of being, kind of continuing through,
and where we're trying to, kind of where this all leads to, is these three qualities. So
just to remember that, when we sit down for a practice, or to read the Dharma, to reflect
on the Dharma, we're just trying to actually more genuinely connect to these three points.
As the kind of maze of reality is so complex, and we ourselves are so complex within that,
ourselves as dream beings in a very big dream world, that having these kind of key points
in our minds to come back to, because that's actually where the path leads, it's where
the path begins, and just to kind of, amidst all the amazing variety, to kind of retouch
that home base again and again. So specifically the topic of this kind of brief talk and opening,
it's a slight bit into this one doorway of many, the topic of this kind of reflection
now is called overpowering our own perceptions. Overpowering our own perceptions. And then
the subtitle is kind of like the essential, is something like the essential value of power
in Vajrayana Buddhism. So, I kind of like going to the kind of little, the spots that
are a little, a little juicy, like power. So this is the topic today, power. And just
today like, oh, how is this going to be power? Because it's out on a limb talking about power.
So I went on a ding, ding, ding, ding, the magic smartphone and just put in three words,
rikpa, wiki, power. What does the internet say to me, you know? And it came back with
all these things, rikpa, wiki, power. So that's my search, that's my search field. And I got
back my, of the 13,000 results in 0.33 seconds, 10 powers, five powers, four powers, six powers,
four bases of miraculous powers, Vidyadhara with power over life, four empowerments, compassionate
energy, empowerment, five strengths. If we've been in the Dharma for a little bit, these
are kind of core things. I mean, they're very core, all of these, five powers, 10 powers,
six powers, four bases, miraculous powers. So then I went, okay, what are the 10 powers?
Because power, you know, it's kind of like someone degree, a little bit of a iffy or off-limits
topic. And it's like, so curious in Buddhism, why is it so off-limits? Why has this become
so off-limits? So off-limit? Because Buddhism is filled with power. These books, if we get
to them, I can do keyword search in these books, they're just filled with a word power. There's
so much power in Tibetan Buddhism, and there's so much power in the nature. I mean, really,
every single system dies without power, disintegrates. What's power? Vital energy, life force, chi,
like just that lung, the wind, the vitality, the clarity, the force, the power, right?
I mean, it's so in Tibetan Buddhism, oftentimes they put these three wisdom, compassion, power,
these are the Buddha's teachings. The three lords in the outer tantras, wisdom is manjushri,
compassion is avala kiteshvara chenrinsig, power is vajrapani, Lord of Secrets. It's so
essential in Buddhism, and I would say in the nature, in all natural systems, they have
to have the vital force, the energy, any system, any person, any relationship. It has to have
its own internal integrity, the energy which gives it its movement, its activity, its expression,
its command of how it can play in its arena, in its display. And Buddhism is just filled
with power, the nature is filled with power. So I think really the question is not as,
it's interesting why is power so off limits to talk about? Because the nature is filled
with it, and without it, the natural systems die. They disintegrate into subsystems that
don't hold as much power, that are less complex, right? It goes down to lowest level energy,
energy level, even at the subatomic particle level, that's how it functions. When the complexity
can't go here, it breaks into its more fundamental lower energy parts. That's just kind of how
that happens. So power, overpowering one's own perceptions. And I've come to see in Sutra
Mahayana and my very little teeny tiny pinhole view of anything about Buddha Dharma, which
is so sadly pathetic, it's so small. To even be able to say these things now is really
kind of sad, it shows it's really degenerate age. Really. I mean the one thing that's not
degenerate about that is that these, I'm trying to just repeat teachings that I've heard the
way the Buddha said, this is still intact. There's like a living vital life force energy
that still goes all the way back to Gurumbiche and Buddhism community and we still have it.
It's still happening, it's still thriving, it's still alive. The power is still there.
So what I've come to see in Sutra Mahayana and a tiny little pinhole view is power is
really about alignment, aligning. Lineage is about getting in proper relationship with
reality, proper relationship with myself, right mindfulness, right view, right conduct, right
speech. This is about a proper fit with what's going on around me. I'm lining up with it
in a way where I can be with it, right, have the power with, I can participate with it
and not squash it, but also be receptive and let it do its thing, but within what I'm available
for. So there's always this give and take, attuning. This is called skillful means. It's
the really key for Sutra Mahayana, skillful means. If we're really trying to make the
wish that vow, the natural kind of such a beautiful gigantic vow for all beings to be
free of suffering. And I personally will be the one to help bring that about my thoughts,
my deeds, my actions. That's an amazing amount of power we need. So how am I going to have
that power? Because the answer actually gets really simple. Be with the nature, tune into
the nature. The power is already there. The natural systems already have their vitality.
It's a question of how much can I hold without breaking? How much can I hold without getting
stuck, without boxing the nature, natural vitality and the energy according to my preferences,
my egoic clinging, my way? How willing is my view to flexibly engage with experience?
How much of my own natural energetic display am I allowed to say, oh, this is happening?
Oh, this anger is happening and not just shut it off. Oh, there's like passions happening
and not shut it off. And at the same time, not be ruled by it, but to let the nature
move and to accommodate and let it do what it does to align with the nature and not try
to make it my way to be with it and let it do what it does. Let it go. Because it's constantly
correcting itself. Interdependence is constantly enhancing itself. I'm really kind of fixated
on this word right now, auto enhancing. I really think that's what the great bodhisattvas
do. They sensitively see the cause and effect dynamics in a system, whether that's in a
room or with a person or in themselves, they see that system, all the subtle cause and
effect happening. So subtle, so much more subtle than sentient awareness. And they see what's
stuck and what's available to be like enhanced a little bit. What, like the readiness disposition
and availability of the student, right? To receive a transmission blessing and empowerment,
right? It all comes down to the receptivity of the person, my own mind. And these bodhisattvas
see it so clearly, these natural cause and effect dynamics, and they see where I'm available,
where I'm stuck and where I'm not available. And then they just like give a little more
space, a little more loving energy, a little more kind attention, a little more kind of
like frictional boost, a little more energy, a little more power in really specific spots
like a surgeon. And then my own system can start to auto enhance itself. And then the
power comes from me. And it's not some power bestowed on me. It's not some I have to go
and like, you know, like beg for power. But then my own awareness can wake itself up.
And I need the support to actually be woken up because I haven't woken up yet. And it's
been so long. I need that support. So then it becomes a really critical question with
all the discussions on power. The real critical critical question comes around to discernment.
Proper tuning. Proper alignment. In my mind, in this relationship, in this community, in
this context, at this time, wherever I'm holding my field of vision, whatever I'm considering
my world right now, what is available to be auto enhanced? What needs to be boosted? And
what can't? What's so stuck? It's not ready to be. It's not ready to open and have more
wisdom energy come through. That's called discernment. Prajna. And that comes from within
one's own mind. That's completely on my own power. I'm the one who has to see that. What's
available in this situation now. And primarily, before I talk about power with and power over,
I have to find my own personal integrity first. Otherwise, it's all just fancy talk. And usually
it's used to blame other people and not take personal responsibility. First, I have to
connect with my own goodness. So if we're talking in Buddhist context with Sutra Mahayana Buddhism
and Tantra Mahayana Buddhism, Buddha nature has to be there first, which is where we began.
We really have to connect with the goodness first. Goodness in others first, goodness
in ourselves first. That's just a core foundational thing we cannot compromise. If we're really
going to try to be practitioners, we can't start with where someone else is wrong or
where I'm wrong. It completely shuts off our connection to our own power, their own power,
and then how can we co create and make awesome, more powerful, more empowering things? We
can't. We start off with what's wrong, what's missing, what's lacking, what's broken, outside,
inside. And then we try to build something on top of that and all we get is power over.
All we get is I feel something wrong inside and I'm going to try to make you fill in the
gap. That's a really oppressive power. And so we get all these ways of oppressive power.
And so there's a history of oppressive power. And I think this is where a lot of the ify-ness
of this conversation comes up. We've gotten so used to oppressive power that a lot of
people and myself too have a habit of thinking all power is oppressive. But it's not true.
Every system needs power. It needs vitality, integrity, discernment, energy, life force.
It's not a question of power, yes power or no power. It's a question of what kind of
power and is it tuned into the system right now? What's happening in this specific thing
and primarily in my mind, in my heart? And Buddhism, like our gracious Noble Teacher
Buddha, that's where he started. Be your own teacher. Even better than me being right next
to you is for my own mind to have mindfulness to see what my mind is doing right now. That's
the greatest teacher. The Buddha said that and Noble Nagarjuna repeated that and led
her to a friend. And Kemposarang Rinpoche taught about this extensively in his "Shedra"
on Letter to a Friend by Nagarjuna. Personal power has to start with my own responsibility
to see what am I doing? What am I bringing to this? The Buddha was so clear on this.
And then Sutra Mahayana says, okay so we develop that mindfulness, conscientiousness, alertness.
We develop that personal clear seeing that auto enhances my speech and my activities
because it brings more prajna and the more prajna brings more compassion and the compassion
includes the system. It lets my natural vitality be there. And then the natural next move is
to extend, to become a servant to the world. A servant of peace. That's the next natural
extension of that. It's called bodhicitta. It's a bodhisattva style. I discover I have
some internal worth, then I take responsibility for really like actually enhancing that and
growing that and opening that and freshening that. My own power. And it naturally extends
to, oh you have so much worth and power too, so what can I do to tune in to you and your
terms, what works for you and your history and language and trauma and all the ways that
we are habit situate my sense of self. I can tune in there as much as I can according to
my skillfulness, my power. And then whatever is available, uplift and then let go because
you have to keep your power. I can't do anything for you. Fundamentally you can't make my mind
wake up. You can just make it a little easier to have my own mind have a teachable moment.
That's what an empowerment is. The teacher says, I'm doing this with my body, speech
and mind. They say students, you do this with your body, speech and mind. And then we'll
do these ritualized things. We'll create this kind of very synthesized, very harmonic scenario
and we'll let the lineage blessings pour through it and let all the wisdom beings like totally
mingle and merge with us here in the sacred space and have the mind see itself more clearly.
These are called the primary cause and condition which is my mind seeing itself and the secondary
cause and condition, which is what all the empowerment dynamics are about. It's not some
ritual hocus pocus. It's about connecting to the vital energy in the dynamics like the
cause and effect way bigger than we ever usually do and much more subtle than we ever usually
do. So all of a sudden all the juice of all this vast network of cause and effect is allowed
to come into my being, my mind right now, like, like, you know, nectar being poured on my head.
And guru yoga, right? It's the same thing. Self empowerment in our own visualization practice,
self empowerment. And it's just so I can wake up. What? Not because something I didn't have
came into me, but because my own power harmonized with itself more fully. It was less blocked.
My own Buddha nature was shining out more beautifully. And then I have the power to keep doing that
.
That's what Vajrayana is about. In empowerment, we got to try to see, oh, this happened. Oh,
there is, there is this type of nature that's fully open and compassionate, loving, kind.
It's so much power, so much energy. And we try to recognize that our own natural state
of being. And then we try to reproduce that again and again, right now in real time, in
this sadhana practice, in this moment, even without a sadhana practice, we're trying to
ongoingly recognize that same natural state and use eventually we get so good, try to
use everything as a secondary support to have that waking up, to have that energy kind of
like shine on. And then it's not a question really in that context. So this is a very Dharma
context. In that context, there's not a question of power over versus power with. It's much
more in my estimation, a question of healthy power over and healthy power with. Power over,
what does it mean? Hierarchy. There's really toxic hierarchies and there's really liberative
hierarchies. Toxic hierarchy. There's like so many crusades and genocides that have been
done because of that. That is something to be, whatever we can do to avoid that, we should
use our own prajna to avoid that and to stop that. Healthy hierarchies. Buddhism's filled
with it. It's called nine yanas, ten boomies. I mean, any hierarchical system, it's just
a growth hierarchy. You start at step one, then you move to step two, then step three,
your compassion starts like this, then it gets like this, then it's step three, step
four. All the yanas, it's a total natural hierarchy system. If someone's on the tent
boomy, they are definitely above someone on the first boomy. Right? They're power. They
have much more power. So you can say they're much more finely attuned to the nature. So
what happens with healthy power over? We, meaning whoever's involved in the conversation
gets to decide, okay, what's the metric we're looking at here? Is it talking about boomies?
And what is boomy measuring? Bodhicitta. Okay, so we're going to talk about bodhicitta. Okay,
so how much is your bodhicitta on and how much is my bodhicitta on? Your bodhicitta
is on! Tent boomy. My bodhicitta is nothing. Firefly in the sun. They have much more guidance
and expert skillfulness on that metric than I do. So many beings. How do they use that
power? A natural, healthy power over dynamic will help me recognize that in myself and
it'll let me know these are the steps I can take to do the same thing and to realize the
same degree of power that they have. The best teachers in Buddhism want all their students
to surpass them. And they give the means to do it. This is a very healthy hierarchy. The
best teachers. Really, and for we ourselves, a really realistic assessment, we are composed
for the future. Straight up. I want to be the most nutritious compost as possible for who's
coming after this upcoming generation. And this is like such a big project to free all
beings from samsara. It's such a big view. So what can I do to harmonize my own internal
power, my vitality, and to rely on expert guidance tuned into very specific metrics?
The five power, the ten powers, right? The ten powers. Power over life. Power over mind.
Power over material things. Power over action. This is just straight up, Sutra mayana power.
It's all power over. Power over life. Over mind. Over material things. Power over action.
Power over birth. Power over aspirations. Power over prayer. Power over miracles. Power
over wisdom. Power over dharma. And then there's Mipham Rinpoche's commentary. Rigpa Wiki,
ten powers. This is called healthy power over, healthy hierarchy. There's no question that
there is such a thing. I think it's a degenerate idea that all hierarchy is fundamentally bad,
or that all power is fundamentally wrong. I think this is a very distorted perspective.
You can just keyword search in any Buddhist book the word power and you'll find the healthy
version of the power. And then what is power with? Cooperative, participatory, it listens,
it learns, it receives, it corrects. Oh, I made this mistake. Oh, and you confess it.
I made this mistake. I want to not make this mistake again. I want to receive the blessings
and the four powers of Vajrasattva. Like I'm going to activate those to actually remove
that mistake from my stream of mind and not keep doing it. Not keep going down that same
old path, the same drain, not leaking all my power. I want to have more integrity so
I can help others more and serve better, tune into others better, power with. And then once
that kind of attunement happens more skillfully than the arena of my capacity expands, I can
serve more beings. I can chew into all the things they've been through so much more sensitively.
So it's not just saying some like, oh, the four of these and the 10 of this and all that.
It's not just frameworks that are totally reliable, but it's much more of a direct experience
with what someone really needs to, like what's actually going on with them. And these really
skillful realized beings like the Venerable Kemperemiches, they know right what it is.
So they don't have to take some big hour long thing. They just go right to the point. And
it's what a blessing to be around beings like that. It just saves us so much time. This healthy
power over. They tune into us and help us auto correct ourselves to discover our own
power. What an amazing blessing. There's so much to say about power. It's a very big topic.
I'm going to very quickly go through, I just went through, open some of Rimeche's books
today and looked up the word power. And then I put them into, here's my narrative. Chapter
one, chapter two, chapter three. Okay. Chapter one. This is the current, the current May
upcoming is like the next month calendar quote, PVC calendar quote, just one moment of
understanding
the nature of impermanence has tremendous power to soften and relax our mind, breaking
down our ego clinging and grasping. Just one moment of tuning into impermanence has a tremendous
power to soften and relax our mind, let our nature kind of shine on and break down all
the ways we're preventing that with our ego clinging. And Rimeche's book, Ceaseless Echoes
of the Great Silence, they're going over when the Heart Sutra was first taught by the, with
the Buddha between Shari Putra and Chenrezig, Avalokiteshvara, and they said this, the perfect
time. There's the five perfections, one of which is the perfect time. Perfect time. The
perfect time is undisturbed by mind, emotions or environment. It's peacefulness allows the
power of the teaching to manifest. The perfect time is undisturbed by mind emotions or environment.
Its peacefulness allows the power of the teaching to manifest. There's not enough time to like
say a big thing about each of these. So there's, and they kind of speak for themselves. The
Seven Nails by the Rimeche's, this is like their commentary on Sri Sinha's Seven Nails
that he gave to his students. So Sri Sinha, this is on personal power. You have every
authority and every power to change your future. Of course the future has not yet arrived but
the present is here and it's like the wheel of a car. Wherever you like to turn in the
future is in your hands right now. For this reason many great Zogchen practitioners have
said the horse's reins are in your own hands. Wherever you'd like the horse to go, it is
in your own hands and no one else's. This is called personal power from a Zogchen level.
So we have the power fundamentally and all the Buddha's teachings are based on that fact.
We have to keep our own power. So a side point is that a study is the insurance policy. If
we actually find ourselves in an unhealthy power dynamic, then study or like what we've
heard from the Buddha and our contemplation will give us, will cue us in to say, "Hey,
the Buddha didn't teach this. According to my study and these scriptures and all these
teachings I've received and what I've reflected, the Buddha didn't teach that." And if you're
with someone, like a teacher or a community, and they're unwilling to have the discussion
about, "Oh, is this according to the Buddha's teachings or not?" If it's a Buddhist community,
they should be very up for that conversation because otherwise what else are they doing?
So for a student, you have to be able to check things. What's the role of a student? What's
the quality of a teacher? What's the role of a teacher? What's the quality of a student?
We've received these teachings so many times from our teachers. Why? So we can check for
ourselves. What's going on here in my mind in this relationship? What's expected? What's
upcoming on the path? What are the pitfalls? How does the system maintain its integrity?
This is called samayas, pratimosya vows, bodhisattva vows, the protections to maintain the internal
integrity or power of a system to make my promise come true, my bodhisattva aspiration
come true, my Vajrayana commitment come true. They give us all these guidelines so we can
do it for ourselves. This is called really healthy power with and healthy power over.
So then uprooting, clinging, commentary on Mipham Rinpoche's wheel of analytic meditation.
So this is Sutra Mahayana, Mipham Rinpoche, largely on the five skandhas. These are all
Kemba Rinpoche's books. So this is on lessening the power of thinking. Uh-oh. So now it's
talking about lessening power. It is important to exercise authority over what we call mind.
It needs a certain state of discipline, when what we think is not always true. In fact,
our minds are often very deluded. We shouldn't give our thoughts full authority or power
over us. Otherwise, we give too much power to thinking, which causes instability in our
minds. In order for mindfulness to guide our thoughts in the right direction, observing
our thoughts is all that we need to begin. To discipline the mind and put it on the right
track, all that is required is here right now in our own mind itself. Loving kindness, compassion,
and wisdom are what lead it in the right direction and cultivate proper discipline.
So we have to be discerning again over what we're giving authority to even in ourselves.
Is this thought train like chain of delusion? Is it not empowering me or is it empowering
me? We have to discriminate or discern. That's called mindfulness, right? Then this goes
on to talk about the power of rigpa, not just the unhealthy, sometimes unhealthy power of
neurotic mind, but the healthy power of wisdom awareness. Ego is the misconception that personality
is everything. It's a kind of holding and grasping which, by its very nature, does not allow
for freedom or openness. As a result, the nature of mind, rigpa, is not able to fully display
all of its inherent qualities. The energy and power of the inner state is not fully
revealed. Ego doesn't allow the original wisdom of non-conceptual wakefulness to radiate.
In addition, it doesn't allow us to see the illusory nature of attachment. Instead, ego
clinging, which is what ego is, manifests in every single action, outer and inner, middle,
top and bottom, throughout the body and the mind. When ego clinging is loosened, there
is a natural openness, freedom and relaxation that allows love and compassion to arise.
As attachment is removed, love and compassion radiate out very easily without effort. Since
possessiveness and greed are a result of ego clinging, when ego clinging is absent, they
naturally disappear, and instead they are replaced by non-attachment and generosity.
In fact, to go beyond clinging is to realize the true nature of emptiness, and to fully
realize emptiness is to become an arhat or a bodhisattva. So that's what a healthy power
is like when we don't kind of box it up and constrain it. Then in their book, there's
a restricted book on Yeshe Lama called "The Supreme Wisdom." There's a section, page
314, on the five powers. Then I jump to the fifth one, the power of wisdom.
The fifth and final power is the power of wisdom. As we've said before, wisdom means
knowing something clearly, without deprecation, exaggeration, subtracting, adding, or labeling.
It knows everything as it is. This is the nature of rigpa. Rigpa is free from all complexities
and all dualities. Rigpa is pure, unimpeded, and free from coming and going. It is free
from existing, non-existing, neither and either. Rigpa is totally free, totally infinite, totally
open, and totally empty. It embodies all of the kyas and all the wisdoms are completed
within it without missing anything. Relaxing without making any effort and knowing everything
clearly as it is, is known as wisdom. In Dzogchen, we are kindling the light of self-born wisdom.
Rigpa illuminates, clarifies, and brings brightness in every direction beyond all directions.
It goes beyond space, time, and every other conception. That is the power of wisdom. In
order to keep our practice moving forward, it is very important to have these five powers
all the time. They make our practice more directed and bring us closer to our goal, which is
why the Buddha called them powers. When you have power, you have abilities. We should
always apply these five powers in both meditation and post-meditation. And they are the powers
of devotion, joyful effort, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom. And there is a pema mandala
that
goes over the five powers, extensively by the Kambhirmachis. So that is what the power
of Rigpa is like. Then in their book, Vajra Sound of Peace, Practicing Seven Chapter Prayer
of Guru Padmasambhava. This was Kenshin Bhallan Sheribhirmachai's last teaching here in 2010.
He taught for a month on this text, page 41. "The Dharmakaya Lama, the nature of the mind,
is not a negation state. It is not nihilistic, blank, or empty. As it says in the text, it
is filled with great compassion and great wisdom power. This is the clarity aspect of
the mind, which Guru Padmasambhava calls the pure land of spontaneous great bliss. Altogether,
the inherent qualities of compassion, wisdom, and clarity are the pure land of great blissfulness.
Many forms emanate from this pure land, but there are five principal ones, form, sound,
mind, qualities, and actions. These are known as the five wisdoms, and also as the five
Dhyana Buddhas. They are the Sambhogakaya, the mind's active expression of compassion,
wisdom, and clarity." So the clarity aspect of mind is the power of the mind. So the whole
point here is if we give out a power as if power is all bad, we lose everything. It's
like a floppy ragdoll. But what we have to keep having is discernment, tuning. We have
to tune in. And what am I ready for? Is this working or not? And that's our own personal
intelligence. Our own wisdom is required. That's where the path doesn't become just some kind
of theistic. It's not theistic, because Buddhism is not theistic. We're actually trying to
recognize from within, but while relying on supports outside, so that we can better serve
everyone outside. So we find internal freedom so we can better serve other beings. This
is also the union of republicanism and democraticism. Internal freedom so that we can best serve
everyone else. There's a real fine point there. Internal power so we can have power with in
a more extensive way. So that's just one side point. Okay, so this I'm almost done. The
Rinpoche's Anu Yoga book, the Shirdra they gave for a month on Anu Yoga Yana, the whole
Yana, the eighth Yana, called the key to opening the wisdom door of Anu Yoga. On page 2, page
2, they go over this. The three inner tantras will rule over or empower everything. In other
words, this Yana will completely reveal the nature or the purity of the way things are
without holding anything back. But what exactly do we mean by rule over or empower? The Tibetan
expression is wangjir. Wang is power and jir is turning, ruling over, ruling out, or power
of method, skills, or secret. So what does ruling over or ruling out mean here? It means
this teaching will rule over or rule out duality mind, ordinary mind, or regular duality
conceptions.
And from where or to where will it rule them out? It will rule them out in the purity state
the way the nature already is. Thus the inner tantras rule out regular ordinary duality
conceptions and usher us into the purity status known as the purity state of wisdom and the
kayas or the purity state of wisdom and forms. So this is where we're subduing our own neurotic
states of mind and grasping. This is healthy power. This is actually the whole path of
Buddhism is what we have to do. Then in their liberating duality with wisdom display book,
the eight emanations of Guru Rinpoche on page three, Venerable Camperomache say Guru Padmasambhava
is associated with transforming negative energy into more peaceful and compassionate forms
and with developing power and a heart of loving kindness and compassion. So Guru Rinpoche
and with developing power and a heart of loving kindness and compassion. Wisdom, compassion
and power. And this is the last one I'll do. There's one more. An essential journey. All
of Rinpoche's books, they all go over the power so extensively and the tantras are just
filled with power. And like there's many ways that they unpack this and many levels of the
meaning of power. And if we use our own discernment, then this becomes something that we can really
like have it really auto enhance our own path and not waste so much time. I mean, honestly,
like for myself too. So the last thing is this Zogchen view, which Rinpoche's have taught
about quite a lot. And they're like Zogchen view is often taught about in these three
ways, the essence, the nature and the compassionate energy or power. And this is we're about to
say a prayer by His Holiness, Guru Rinpoche, about these three kayas. Dharmakaya is the
essence and the nature is the sambhoga kaya and the compassionate energy is the namanakaya
display, the power. And here with these three, the power or this compassionate energy, which
is called tukche, then it says it has three qualities. And this is all very traditional,
the quality of being unconfined, unobstructed and all pervasive. So that's the natural radiating
power of reality. And of our own mind, we're a part of that dream. And then they say those
same compassionate energy, the arising display of mind of the wisdom mind has three wonderful
qualities. Then one is the wisdom that knows, so it discerns accurately as five wisdoms.
The compassion that is loving and caring. It includes it embraces everything. Nothing's
left out. There's no favorites and there's no preferences. And then three, the power
that is able to liberate, protect and benefit beings and fulfill the enlightened activity
of the Buddhas. This is the power of this compassionate energy to liberate, protect
and benefit beings and fulfill the enlightened activity of the Buddhas. So this is like the
nature of mind. I mean, this is what this teaching is about. And without, if we don't
let that power be there in the nature of the mind, then we're not working with the nature
of the mind. And if we don't let the power be there, like this kind of healthy discerning
power, then we can't do anything on the path. We like need that vital force. And then to
bring it all to a point when we're dying and all, we can't rely on any external anything.
Because all our ways of cognizing and making sense of things and referring to things, the
sounds and smells and tastes and forms and memories, it's all going to go out of our
control. At that moment, we'll see how much personal power we have. Did we take all our
power and put it outside? Blame someone else? Or did we really actually activate our own
intelligence? What is there unaffected by whatever happens? And that's going to be a
very practical question. It's not even a question at that point. It's just going to be an
experience
we have and we'll see for ourselves how much did I really actually take my own personal
power seriously? And we'll see. And I really hope we all see and then we all get free because
we really did now take that question genuinely seriously to cultivate that connectedness
to others, that really genuine bodhisattva outreach to want to care for them and uplift
them and serve them and be with them and tune into them. And then discernment, the discernment
that, okay, so I am affected by reality and by others because I'm a conditioned being
and this is a conditioned mind. So to wisely be affected, to wisely receive guidance and
to wisely discern what's not helpful and just put it aside. So to wisely be affected by
experience that's called education. Everything is like a teachable moment and everything
actually can be empowering. These are the higher level tantra teachings. Everything
can be seen as the guru at that level if we're really going to use discernment. And then
similarly at the same time we're wisely being affected, being changed, being influenced,
being opened, being softened. At the same time we're trying to see what cannot be affected.
The deathless nature. What in me is not a question of whatever happens with that power
over or power under or power with or good or bad or right or wrong or healthy or unhealthy.
Toxic or natural, it's nothing to do with that. It's just a great equality which is
where all these practices are rooted in. And the final point in guru yoga, yes, the guru
Rinpoche is above. And where did guru Rinpoche come from? Within. And what's the nature of
guru Rinpoche? The same as my nature. And guru Rinpoche is realized so much more of that
nature than me. He's way beyond, way beyond little old me and my small mindedness. So he
has power over and it's healthy and he's from within me because it's my display. So that's
power with. And our nature is the same. That's the great equality. And it's totally pure.
He's completely beyond all dualistic fixation. That's a great purity. And at the end his
mind mingles into my mind out of his so much compassion and we become inseparable and the
same. And then everything is just a display of reality and let its power do what it does
naturally. So thank you. I appreciate you all very much. I wanted to open this door because
it's a door already opened, but maybe it's not done with so much love. And I wanted to
also say this is really relevant to Buddha Dharma. So we have to discern the what's this
really healthy power. It's because this is really talks about this is really comes down
to the integrity of the lineage. If we don't really clearly discern how the lineage is
really relating to this, these kind of questions, these kind of inquiries and to really have
that inquiry be alive in ours in our minds with really clear empowered discernment. Then
it's a very chaotic world. Now we can lose all kinds of amazing things. So really I'm
very strong about this. Not on my watch. I'm not going to be the one to lose the integrity
of the lineage teachings, even though I'm just like a speck of nothing. Like at the
very least we can do the way we've received it and we can really try to like allow for
the blessings of the lineage to enter us and to change us and to do that with a lot of
internal integrity and like personal power. And that's what the Buddha has us to do. So
I think it's important for me to say that in terms of me talking about power, anything,
that I really genuinely like I see in a lot of ways like I'm very much coming from a place
of advantage or privilege. So I'm definitely a white male hetero normative cisgender middle
age person in United States of America right now. And that's so it's kind of very questionable
for me to be talking about a topic like power. So I really see that and at the same time
I'm genuinely like this is such an important topic to really have an inquiry around. And
I know a lot of people don't have the advantage I have and in particular of really being able
to be in the company and to learn at the feet of extraordinary realized beings like the
Venerable Kemper which is that is just an unimaginable privilege or an advantage. And
I've had that very special unique opportunity and still enjoy it and I'm so glad that I
do. But for people who haven't had that and who have really been hurt like really hurt
intentionally hurt by unhealthy toxic power dynamics like I'm so sorry that that's a part
of your experience now and that that's I'm really genuinely like deeply that's like deeply
troubling for me. And so still like how can we hold that that space like this inquiry
around like our own internal kind of energy and power and vitality like how can we reconnect
to that and like really kindly and clearly put ourselves in the company of others and
of supportive conditions that help us like reestablish trust and reestablish connection
to the goodness and others as well as ourselves and then step by step to undergo that process
of like personal exploration and also personal freedom like the path of enlightenment. So
I see that that's definitely a slow process regardless of where we're coming like how
wherever we enter that path it's going to be an exceptionally demanding path. And I
think for most of us in this very like supercharged powerful frightening charnel ground which
is the twenty first century we all need to proceed very carefully and gently and like
with a lot of self-conscious kindness and intelligence to see what tunes with us and
what doesn't and to really take responsibility as much as we can for that too and to surround
ourselves with the nutritious conditions that help us really get into those stuck spots
we have and open them and give them more renewed vital energy so we can continue to expand
and grow and soften and and keep going on a path of enlightenment for ourselves and
all beings that's a slow and very involved process for any of us and so I just I wanted
to really clearly say that and then to be in a lineage structure if you have that opportunity
I mean there's many of them and there's many different world religious traditions that
have them and then the structure itself is also different from the people who are in
the structure so we really do have to use all of these capacities we have and let those
come out and fully inform how we engage step by step with our path so I hope you find those
supports for yourself I'm trying to actively stay tuned into the ones that I found for
myself and like all together really to like bring out that vitality of the nature so that
we can all like be refreshed and enjoy it together it was like one really big family
like in this together so thank you friends thank you thank you